---
layout: post
title:  turning
date:   2017-09-29 018:05:00
category: blog
---

It’s starting to turn - that is to say, my foot, and the leaves. These past few weeks I’ve been looking down to notice my left coming in at an angle, it’s a development that’s been creeping on me to be sure, but it’s settled in my attentions now. Not again, not again! That scar was for something - I have to maintain myself - the body is a machine. How many times I should have listened to mom. And I will do, I have to, if only not to be cursing my inaction on another operating table decades from now.

But nevermind the foot - the leaves are turning. It’s the first cold day since I’ve been up here. The air is what makes it, it’s crisp and transparent and the breathing is not just an automatic thing but a sensation. The smell of the earth makes its way more easily. Cold, sunny, earthy and brown, and the crunch of leaves underfoot.

Class was bad. I came alive in the second half, but the first half I was a zombie, almost ill, not having eaten. Still the second half - in a discussion of Kafka I related a story of the rabbi and his children and Germany and got too self-conscious, laughed nervously, approached real emotion and they could sense it. It was clumsily narrated. There was heart in it but I did bad work of it, I didn’t tell it as it was.

Sanborn and I have an understanding; but then he might have the same understanding with everyone, him being one of those sensitive types with the ability to reach out and acknowledge the shared human experience in another person. He makes no secret of his humanity - he has no persona to cover it up. He smiles too quickly and speaks too conversationally for it to be otherwise.

Sanborn was wearing a maroon shirt today. There was something about the maroon - it was my visual anchor in those three hours. The maroon was right in that room. And Sanborn too, when his lip curls up in amusement. And Alida - I love looking at her. I wasn’t surprised when I found out she was from Minnesota. She’s unselfconsciously beautiful, lean and tan, blue eyes, blond hair, artless. Left-handed, too, which for some reason I wasn’t expecting.

There were a pregnant few minutes in and just after class when I felt my chest heavy with the sorrow of a philosophical re-realization. I say repeated because these existential moments are a cyclical experience. They come and then I beat them off with the banality of the Alltagsleben. We were speaking about transience, the sorrow of time passing, and then the class ended. I wanted and at the same time didn’t want to be the last one out the door; wanted, because I like Sanborn; didn’t want, because the rabbi story was still raw on me, and I could feel the existential sorrow taking hold. My coolness in public is my weapon - I don’t know Sanborn well enough to cry in front of him. So I exchanged a few words and went around the back of Johnson to grieve.

Sanborn ended up finding me there, too, on the way to his car. I was half-expecting it, but I didn’t want it. He didn’t notice anything. He probably just thinks I’m a bit of a loner.

I don’t like that I cry, even if it’s not for myself and more for the human condition. Call me simple but I want the steel in me, I want the control.

Anyway, I brought over a leftover can of green tea, and I’m going to drink it.