---
layout: post
title:  maine and etc.
date:   2017-10-16 09:00:00
category: blog
---

A week or so ago, Sanborn told us he was from Maine. In the days that followed, Maine crept in from the periphery - a beer from Maine on the bar menu, snatches of conversation involving Maine-ean vacation homes. Maybe I noticed these references because of Sanborn's divulgence, and they were always there; or maybe it was a coincidence. In any case, the beer was from Allagash. It was good.

*dramatis persona(e)*

Geoffrey Sanborn, from Maine, late forties or early fifties. Goes by Goeff. His sign-off greeting on e-mails is *g.* He has brown eyes, an infinity tattoo on the nape of his neck, and moderately advanced balding which he has shaved off. Not particularly tall or short - has a way of looking as if his clothes are too big for him, although really they fit. Perhaps it's the inward, vague way he carries himself, like an overgrown used-to-stare-out-the-window boy. Geoffrey Sanborn's voice is a rounded, soft tenor, considered, slow, and occasionally halting. Masculine, somehow, even in the softness. Of those accidentally poetic incidents not uncommonly found in the facts of actual life, is that Geoffrey Sanborn attended a primary school called Strawberry Fields. Strawberry Fields - it couldn't be otherwise. It writes its own novel, really. (I wonder if that's what his father had in mind.)

Geoffrey Sanborn reacts easily to the expressions of others. I smile, he smiles, it affects him right away. I'm the same (who are these superhuman people that can keep a straight face?). Geoffrey Sanborn is easily moved to tears, and shamelessly. He has a charmingly bad singing voice and moves his eyebrows a lot when attempting a note. I imagine, like the Josephine in Kafka he so admires.  
Last week he made some comment about the nature of love and hum-sung the hook from Something In The Way She Moves. In that moment the sun was coming in through the window at a low angle and it cut a blade of light under the table, eclipsing his shoe, illuminating it on the slate-blue carpet. I loved him in that moment.

It was Geoffrey Sanborn I thought of while I was flipping through Zadie Smith in a deserted corridor this evening, imagining the distracted way in which he might put on a tie, or loop a belt. Or how he might wander into Johnson Chapel on an urge to commune with the piano - inexplicably, even to himself. The hallway in Chapin, where I had perched myself on a bench, was saved from garishness by the smell of old wood. I had snuck myself in before the police came to lock the outside - I was alone with the underground of the building, and old wood, and an imaginary Geoffrey Sanborn in Maine, eyes past the window, past the sky, elsewhere. And it occurred to me as I was walking back in the rain at precisely midnight that the black asphalt glittering with water and blue light was everything, everything.

-------
Due to recent extravagances of sleep I've accidentally starved myself on one meal a day. (Hunger is interesting. I sustain it on this interest alone, sometimes.) In this time my collarbones have slowly risen out of the flesh, my cheekbones are taking shape. I like this development. It makes me look like a woman. But I am unhappy with my own vanity. *Stop looking in the mirror,* I tell myself unsuccessfully. But you see, with my baby face and narrow hips and jutting knees, I am desperate to cultivate this elusive essence of *woman*, this is what I want, to be a woman, to drink wine calmly at a table for one, to attend the opera unironically, to laugh low and measured. I do some of these things already. I'm not sure if it's a fantasy - if I'm contructing myself too much. I don't think I am ... just coloring in a sketch that is already there. But I focus too much on this process when I look in the mirror. If, one day, a dark-eyed man with a mahogany voice and an unselfconscious, well-thumbed library should take me in his arms in the living room, I will not have calculated it.  

But to become, to become - !
