---
layout: post
category: found
date: "2016-12-16 13:54:00"
title: nehru on religion
---

>   I have always hesitated to read books of religion. The totalitarian claims
>   made on their behalf did not appeal to me. The outward evidences of the
>   practice of religion that I saw did not encourage me to go to the original
>   sources. Yet I had to drift to these books, for ignorance of them was not a
>   virtue and was often a severe drawback. I knew that some of them had
>   powerfully influenced humanity and anything that could have done so must
>   have some inherent power and virtue in it, some vital source of energy. I
>   found great difficulty in reading through many parts of them, for try as I
>   would, I could not arouse sufficient interest; but the sheer beauty of some
>   passages would hold me. And then a phrase or a sentence would suddenly leap
>   up and electrify me and make me feel the presence of the really great. Some
>   words of the Buddha or of Christ would shine out with deep meaning and seem
>   to me applicable as much today as when they were uttered 2,000 or more years
>   ago. There was a compelling reality about them, a permanence which time and
>   space could not touch. So I felt sometimes when I read about Socrates or the
>   Chinese philosophers, and also when I read the Upanishads and the Bhagavad
>   Gita. I was not interested in the metaphysics, or the description of ritual,
>   or the many other things which apparently had no relation to the problems
>   that faced me. Perhaps I did not understand the inner significance of much
>   that I read, and sometimes, indeed, a second reading threw more light. I
>   made no real effort to understand mysterious passages and I passed by those
>   which had no particular significance for me. Nor was I interested in long
>   commentaries and glossaries. I could not approach these books, or any book,
>   as Holy Writ which must be accepted in their totality without challenge or
>   demur. Indeed, this approach of Holy Writ visually resulted in my mind being
>   closed to what they contained. I was much more friendly and open to them
>   when I could consider them as having been written by human beings, very wise
>   and far-seeing, but nevertheless ordinary mortals, and not incarnations or
>   mouthpieces of a divinity, about whom I had no knowledge or surety whatever.
>
>   It has always seemed to me a much more magnificent and impressive thing that
>   a human being should rise to great heights, mentally and spiritually, and
>   should then seek to raise others up, rather than that he should be the
>   mouthpiece of a divine or superior power. Some of the founders of religions
>   were astonishing individuals, but all their glory vanishes in my eyes when I
>   cease to think of them as human beings. What impresses me and gives me hope
>   is the growth of the mind and spirit of man, and not his being used as an
>   agent to convey a message.
>
>   Mythology affected me in much the same way. If people believed in the
>   factual content of these stories, the whole thing was absurd and ridiculous.
>   But as soon as one ceased believing in them, they appeared in a new light, a
>   new beauty, a wonderful flowering of a richly endowed imagination, full of
>   human lessons. No one believes now in the stories of Greek gods and
>   goddesses and so, without any difficulty, we can admire them and they become
>   part of our mental heritage. But if we had to believe in them, what a burden
>   it would be, and how, oppressed by this weight of belief, we would often
>   miss their beauty. Indian mythology is richer, vaster, very beautiful, and
>   full of meaning. I have often wondered what manner of men and women they
>   were who gave shape to these bright dreams and lovely fancies, and out of
>   what gold mine of thought and imagination they dug them.
>
>   Looking at scripture then as a product of the human mind, we have to
>   remember the age in which it was written, the environment and mental climate
>   in which it grew, the vast distance in time and thought and experience that
>   separates it from us. We have to forget the trappings of ritual and
>   religious usage in which it is wrapped, and remember the social background
>   in which it expanded. Many of the problems of human life have a permanence
>   and a touch of eternity about them, and hence the abiding interest in these
>   ancient books. But they dealt with other problems also, limited to their
>   particular age, which have no living interest for us now.

  — Jawaharlal Nehru, *The Discovery of India* (1946)
